---
course_title: Symbolic Logic 1
note_title: Weeks 7-9
has_toc: Yes
css: logic.css
---

#Advanced Symbolization

##Symbols to English

If we want to be able to use our new system of derivations effectively, we
need to be able to apply them to English language arguments. But if we want to
do that, we need to know how to go back and forth, from English to symbols,
and from symbols to English.

As before, let's begin by thinking about how we can translate sentences in our
formal language into English, and some simple ways in which we can "clean up"
our translations in order to make them more readable. 

<div class="algorithm"> 

Symbols to English

:   #. If the sentence to be translated is in unofficial notation, then (if it
    makes things simpler for you) restore any parentheses that would be there if
    the sentence were in official notation.
    #. Locate the main connective of the formal sentence.
    #. If the main connective is $\rightarrow$, so that the sentence is
    $(\phi\rightarrow\psi)$, then write "If $\phi$, then $\psi$". 
    #. If the main connective is $\land$, so that the sentence is $(\phi\land\psi)$, then write 
    "it's both the case that $\phi$ and that $\psi$".
    #. If the main connective is $\lor$, so that the sentence is $(\phi\lor\psi)$, then write
    "either $\phi$ or $\psi$"
    #. If the main connective is $\leftrightarrow$ so that the sentence is $(\phi\leftrightarrow\psi)$, then write 
    "if $\phi$ then, and only then, $\psi$"
    #. If the main connective is $\sim$, so that the sentence is $\sim\phi$,
    then write "It is not the case that $\phi$."
    #. If either $\phi$ or $\psi$ contains any formal language connectives,
    then apply this procedure to $\phi$ and $\psi$ as well.
    #. If there's no main connective, and you have only a sentence letter,
    replace the letter with its English meaning according to the scheme of
    translation.
    #. Apply this procedure to each of the sub-formulas of the target sentence.

</div>

Here are some examples, using the following scheme of abbreviation.

--- - ---------------------------------- 
$P$ = Language is powerful 
$Q$ = We try to understand each other 
$R$ = All is lost  
--- - ---------------------------------- 


####Ex. 1 
#. $P\lor R$ 
#. Either $P$ or $R$
#. Either Language is powerful or all is lost

####Ex. 2
#. $P\land Q\rightarrow\sim R$
#. If $P\land Q$, then $\sim R$
#. If it's both the case that $P$ and that $Q$, then it's not the case that
$R$
#. If it's both the case that language is powerful and that we work hard to
understand each other, then it's not the case that all is lost.

####Ex. 3
#. $P\land Q\leftrightarrow\sim R$
#. If $P\land Q$ then, and only then, $\sim R$
#. If it's both the case that $P$ and that $Q$ then, and only then, it's not
the case that $R$
#. If it's both the case that language is powerful and that we work hard 
#. to understand each other then, and only then, it's not the case that all is
lost.

####Ex. 4
#. $\sim P \lor R$
#. Either $\sim P$ or $R$
#. Either it's not the case that $P$ or $R$
#. Either it's not the case that language is powerful or all is lost.

As with our first procedure for translating from symbols to English, this
gives us a unique translation for every sentence, and the translation will
have the right logical properties. But, once again, the sentences are not
automatically easy to understand.[^1]

[^1]: Why do we do it this way, then? Well, the key feature is this:
expressions like "It's both the case that ... and ..." make it easy to figure
out what a connective has inside its left side. For example, with "both ...
and ...", whatever's in the left side is whatever's between "both" and "and".
This makes it easy to recover the parsing structure of our original logical
sentence from the english translation, and ensures that the translation is
logically unambiguous. For example, $(P\land(Q\lor R))$ and $((P\land Q)\lor
R)$ are translated, respectively, as "It's both the case that $P$ and that
either $Q$ or $R$" and "Either it's both the case that $P$ and that $Q$ or
$R$". On the other hand, if we just replace "$\land$" with "and", and '$\lor$'
with "or", then both $(P\land(Q\lor R))$ and $((P\land Q)\lor R)$ become "$P$
and $Q$ or $R$", which is logically ambiguous.

How can we make the sentence more readable? This is more of an art than a
science, but the following tricks may help.

#.  Commas can be used to mark logical breaks in a sentence. For example,
"Either $P$ or it's both the case that $Q$ and $R$" has two main parts: "$P$"
and "it's both the case that $Q$ and that $R$". So, one can write it as
"Either $P$, or it's both the case that $Q$ and $R$". Note that one would not
write this as "Either $P$ or it's both the case that $Q$, and $R$". 
#.  If it creates no ambiguity about the parsing structure of the sentence
(for example, if you have made clear what the main parts are by using commas),
then 
    #. "It's both the case that $P$ and that $Q$" can be replaced by 
    #. "$\phi$ and $\psi$",
    #.  "$\phi$ but $\psi$",
    #.  "$\phi$ although $\psi$",
    #.  "$\phi$ even though $\psi$",
    #.  "$\phi$ despite the fact that $\psi$", and similar phrases.
#.  "Either $\phi$ or $\psi$" can be replaced by 
    #.  "$\phi$ or $\psi$"
    #.  "$\phi$ unless $\psi$", and similar phrases.
#.  "If $\phi$ then, and only then, $\psi$" can be replaced by
    #.  "$\phi$ just in case $\psi$",
    #.  "$\phi$ exactly on the condition that $\psi$",
    #.  "$\phi$ if and only if $\psi$"
    #.  "Just in case $\phi$, $\psi$",
    #.  "Exactly on the condition that $\phi$, $\psi$",
    #.  "If and only of $\phi$, $\psi$, and similar phrases.

Besides just knowing the words that correspond to different logical
connectives, we can also often use a few other tricks. When we have a cluster
of simple sentences which are combined using only English phrases that
translate '$\land$', '$\lor$' or '$\sim$' we can usually "put this in the noun
phrase". For example,

#.  "It's both the case that Polk was a president and that Quincy was a
president" can be paraphrased as 
"Both Polk and Quincy were presidents"
#.  "Either Polk was a president or Quincy was a president" can be paraphrased
as "Either Polk or Quincy was a president".\footnote{Although we use a
singular, rather than plural form of the verb here---I wonder why that is.}
#.  "It's not the case that it's both the case that Polk was a president and
Qunciy was a president" can be paraphrased as "Not both Polk and Quincy were
presidents".
#.  There are, however, some cases where this doesn't work. For example,
consider "Either Polk was not a president, or Quincy was not a president". We
can't paraphrase this as "Either not Polk or not Quincy was a president"---I
suppose because "not Polk" and "not Quincy" aren't noun-phrases that can be
joined into a larger noun phrase. 

We an also sometimes take a logical cluster like this and "put it in the verb
phrase". For example

#.  "Emma sings and Emma dances" can be paraphrased as "Emma sings and dances".
#.  "Either Emma sings or Emma dances" can be paraphrased as "Emma either
sings or dances".
#.  "Either it's not the case that Emma sings or it's not the case that Emma
dances" can be paraphrased as "Emma either doesn't sing or doesn't dance".
Here, we *can* paraphrase a sentence with embedded negations---I suppose
because "doesn't sing" is still a verb-phrase that can be joined into a larger
verb phrase.

One last type of "cleaning up" which we sometimes see is the use of
non-restrictive relative clauses. These allow you to take a verb phrase, like
"dances" and attach it to a noun-phrase (like "cat"), where sometimes this
noun-phrase is inside of a more complex verb-phrase.

#.  "Twyla is a cat and Twyla hunts well." can be paraphrased as "Twla is a
cat who hunts well"
#.  "Tackles hurt the players, and tackles are forbidden" can be paraphrased
as "Tackles, which hurt the players, are forbiddden".[^2]
#.  "Genies grant wishes and genies are often malicious" can be paraphrased as
"Genies, who grant wishes, are often malicious".[^3]

[^2]: Though not as "Tackles which hurt the players are forbidden". What's the
difference here?

[^3]: Say this ten times fast.

##English to Symbols

Translations from English to symbols are correct if they result in a symbol
sentence that, when translated back into English, means the same as (is a
stylistic variant of) the original sentence. When we're dealing with sentences
we find "in the wild", we sometimes have to rely a little bit on our intuition
for natural language. But the same approximate algorithm that we used before
is still sometimes helpful.

<div class="algorithm">
English To Symbols

:   #.  Replace all the stylistic variations on "if $\phi$, then $\psi$", "it
    is not the case that $\phi$", "It's both the case that $\phi$ and that
    $\psi$", "Either $\phi$ or $\psi$", and "if $\phi$ then, and only then,
    $\psi$" with their corresponding non-variant phrases.
    #.  Replace the English main connective with the appropriate symbol. If
    you are replacing anything but "it is not the case that", remember to wrap
    the two clauses you're replacing in parentheses, if they're not already
    wrapped. 
    #.  If there are any sentences remaining that do not occur in the scheme
    of abbreviation, repeat this procedure on those sentences.
    #.  If there are just sentences that occur in the scheme of abbreviation,
    replace them with the corresponding sentence letters.

</div>

As before, the hard part is step 1. Once you have done that, you can always
locate the main connective by looking at the leftmost word. Whatever phrase
that word is a part of (whether it is "if $\phi$, then $\psi$", "it is not the
case that $\phi$", "It's both the case that $\phi$ and that $\psi$", "Either
$\phi$ or $\psi$", or "if $\phi$ then, and only then, $\psi$"), that phrase is
the English main connective which we need to replace in step 2.

#Truth Tables

In this section, we'll discuss the method of *Truth Tables*, which gives us a
"negative test" for validity; derivations show us when an argument form is
good---when the particular instances of that form are guaranteed to be
formally valid. Truth tables show us when an argument form is not good, in a
certain sense---when the particular instances of that argument form are not
guaranteed to be formally valid. 

Our ability to use truth tables depends on two things: *Compositionality*, and
*the Principle of Truth Functionality*.

Compositionality

:   Compositionality is the following feature of languages: the meaning of a
    whole expression, like a sentence, is determined by the meanings of its
    parts. 

Compositionality is often thought to explain how it is even possible for human
beings (finite creatures that we are) are capable of understanding
a potentially infinite collection of sentences. We do not need to know the
meaning of every sentence in advance. We just need to know the meanings of the
parts, and the rules for computing the meaning of a whole from the meanings of
the parts. 

The principle of truth functionality is a certain rule that we have enforced
in the construction of our artificial language.

The Principle of Truth Functionality
 
:   The only contribution that the  parts of our sentences shall make to the
    meanings of the whole is their truth value.

Compositionality tells us that whether a sentence is true or not (this is the
only aspect of its meaning that we will be concerned with) depends only on
what its parts mean. The Principle of Truth Functionality ensures that the
only relevant aspect of the meaning of the parts of a sentence in our language
is whether they are true or false. Between these two principles, we know that
whether a sentence of our language is true or not depends only on whether its
parts are true or false. But there are only a finite number of possible
combinations of truth and falsity that the basic parts of the sentence might
have. This is how we manage to find, among a potentially infinite collection
of cases where an argument might be applied, the cases in which it is possible
for the premises to be true and the conclusion false.

##And, Or, Not

Let us see how these ideas play out in some particular cases. First, we will
observe how sentences whose main connective is $\land$ get their truth values.
These sentences---which look like $(\phi\land\psi)$ are true only when both
halves (the $\phi$ and the $\psi$) are true. This makes sense---the symbol
$\land$ means "and", and what does it mean to say "$\phi$ and $\psi$", other
than to say that $\phi$ is true and $\psi$ is also true?

####Ex. 1
#.  If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is true, then $(P\land Q)$ must be true.
#.  If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is false, then $(P\land Q)$ must be false.
#.  If $P$ is false and $Q$ is true, then $(P\land Q)$ must be false.
#.  If both $P$ and $Q$ are false, then $(P\land Q)$ must be false.
#.  If $P$ is true and $Q$ is true, and $R$ is also true, then $(P\land Q)$ must be true, so $((P\land Q)\land R)$ must also be true.

What about when the main connective is $\lor$? These sentences---which look
like $(\phi\land\psi)$ are true only when one of the halves  (the $\phi$ and
the $\psi$) are true. This makes sense---the symbol $\lor$ means "or", and
what does it mean to say "$\phi$ or $\psi$", other than to say that at least
one of $\phi$ or $\psi$ is true?[^4]

[^4]: This explanation is a little quick, so I include a footnote here to
    address one possible concern. The way that we are thinking about "or" above,
    an or-statement can be true if both of its parts are true. This is how things
    sometimes work in English. For example, when I say "there's going to be beer
    or sangria at the party", this is naturally read as meaning that there might
    be one or the other, or there might be both. 

    But, sometimes in natural language we use "$\phi$ or $\psi$" to mean not just
    that at least one of $\phi$ or $\psi$ is true, but to mean that exactly one of
    $\phi$ or $\psi$ is true. When I say "Each of you will be assigned to either
    the blue team or the red team", that is naturally understood as meaning that
    each person will be assigned to one team, but nobody will be assigned to both. 

    The first reading of "or", on which "$\phi$ or $\psi$" can be true when both
    sides are true is called the "inclusive" or. The second reading, on which
    "$\phi$ or $\psi$" is true when exactly one of $\phi$ or $\psi$ is true is
    called the "exclusive" or. This difference is important in contexts where we
    need to know exactly what we mean (for example, logic, law, and computer
    programming). But it might have slipped by without notice, if we had not
    thought carefully about how the meaning of an or-sentence depends on the
    meanings of its parts.}

####Ex. 2
#.  If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is true, then $(P\lor Q)$ must be true.
#.  If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is false, then $(P\lor Q)$ must be true.
#.  If $P$ is false and $Q$ is true, then $(P\lor Q)$ must be true.
#.  If both $P$ and $Q$ are false, then $(P\land Q)$ must be false.
#.  If $P$ is true and $Q$ is true, and $R$ is false, then $(P\land Q)$ must
be true, so $((P\land Q)\lor R)$ must also be true.

What about when the main connective is $\sim$? These sentences---which look
like $\sim\phi$ are true only when the main part (the $\phi$) is false. This
makes sense---the symbol $\sim$ means "it is not the case that", and what does
it mean to say "it is not the case that $\phi$", other than to say that it is
not the case that  $\phi$ is true?

#.  If $P$ is false, $\sim P$ must be true.
#.  If $P$ is true, $\sim P$ must be false.
#.  If $P$ is false and $Q$ is true, then $\sim P$ must be true, so $(\sim
P\land Q)$ must be true.
#.  If both $P$ and $Q$ are false, then $\sim P$ is true and $\sim Q$ is also
true, so $(\sim P\land\sim Q)$ must be true.
#.  If $P$ is true and $Q$ is false, and $R$ is false, then $(P\land Q)$ must
be false, but $\sim R$ must be true, so $((P\land Q)\lor \sim R)$ must be
true.

We can summarize the rules for $\land, \lor$ and $\sim$ as follows:

Truth-Value Rules for $\land$, $\lor$, $\sim$

:   #.  if a sentence has $\land$ as its main connective, it is true when both
    halves are true. Otherwise it is false.
    #.  If a sentence has $\lor$ as its main connective, it is true when at
    least one half is true. Otherwise, it is false.
    #.  If a sentence as $\sim$ as its main connective, it is true when its
    main part is true. Otherwise, it is false.

##Truth Values, Truth Tables, Tautologies

As the examples of the previous section show, we can use the three simple
rules associated with $\land, \lor$ and $\sim$ to find out what truth values
the sentences built up using these truth connectives have. Here is a
systematic procedure for finding the truth value of a sentence, once you know
the truth values of the sentence letters that occur in the sentence.

<div class="algorithm">
The Method of Composing Truth-Values 

:   #. Parse the sentence, writing out the parsing tree associated with the
    sentence (do this by repeatedly breaking at the main connective, and placing
    the parts that a sentence was built out of beneath the sentence). 
    #. Write the truth values that you know next to the appropriate letters, at
    the bottom of the tree. 
    #. Use the truth value rules associated with the
    connectives to figure out the truth values of sentences higher up in the tree,
    writing these down next to the higher sentences as you figure them out. 
    #. Repeat step 3 until you know the truth value of the whole sentence.
</div>

####Ex. 3
Suppose we know that $P$ and $Q$ are true and that $R$ is false, and we wish
to know whether $(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land R)\land
(P\lor \sim R)))$ is true.

First, we find the main connective, splitting the sentence into:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">
```{#img2 .latex .tikz}
\Tree[.{$(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R)))$}
		[.{$((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
		]
		[.{$((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
		]
	]
```
</div>

We repeat this procedure, finding main connectives and subdividing, finally getting:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">
```{#img3 .latex .tikz}
\Tree[.{$(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R)))$}
		[.{$((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
			[.{$(P\lor \sim Q)$}
				[.{$P$}
				]
				[.{$\sim Q$}
					$Q$
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)$}
				[.{$P$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R$}
					$R$
				]
			]
		]
		[.{$((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
			[.{$(P\land R)$}
				[.{$P$}
				]
				[.{$R$}
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)$}
				[.{$P$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R$}
					$R$
				]
			]
		]
	]
```
</div>

We've now completed step 1. Step 2 tells us to write out appropriate truth
values at the bottom of the tree. Since we know that $P$ and $Q$ are true, and
$R$ is false (we assumed this at the outset), we write these next to the
appropriate sentence letters:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">
```{#img4 .latex .tikz}
$$\Tree[.{$(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R)))$}
		[.{$((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
			[.{$(P\lor \sim Q)$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim Q$}
					$Q~\mathbf{T}$
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
		[.{$((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
			[.{$(P\land R)$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$R ~\mathbf{F}$}
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
	]$$
```
</div>
	
We're now done with step 2. We now repeat step 3 (applying the rules for $\land,\lor$ and $\sim$ until we are done. Since we now know the truth values of all of the parts of several of the sentences on our tree, we can compute the truth values of those sentences using the rules for $\land, \lor$ and $\sim$. We compute those values and write them in:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">
```{#img5 .latex .tikz}
\Tree[.{$(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R)))$}
		[.{$((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
			[.{$(P\lor \sim Q)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim Q~\mathbf{F}$}
					$Q~\mathbf{T}$
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R~\mathbf{T}$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
		[.{$((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R))$}
			[.{$(P\land R)~\mathbf{F}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$R~\mathbf{F}$}
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R~\mathbf{F}$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
	]
```
</div>

Since we now know the truth values of the parts of the sentences in the second
row from the top, we can write those in too:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">
```{#img6 .latex .tikz}
\Tree[.{$(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R)))$}
		[.{$((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))~\mathbf{T}$}
			[.{$(P\lor \sim Q)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim Q~\mathbf{F}$}
					$Q~\mathbf{T}$
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R~\mathbf{T}$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
		[.{$((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R))~\mathbf{F}$}
			[.{$(P\land R)~\mathbf{F}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$R~\mathbf{F}$}
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R ~\mathbf{T}$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
	]
```
</div>
	
And that means that 	$(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land
R)\land (P\lor \sim R)))$ was built using $\lor$ out of one true and one false
sentence. So, the whole sentence is true:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">
```{#img7 .latex .tikz}
\Tree[.{$(((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))\lor ((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R)))~\mathbf{T}$}
		[.{$((P\lor \sim Q)\land (P\lor \sim R))~\mathbf{T}$}
			[.{$(P\lor \sim Q)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim Q~\mathbf{F}$}
					$Q~\mathbf{T}$
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R~\mathbf{T}$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
		[.{$((P\land R)\land (P\lor \sim R))~\mathbf{F}$}
			[.{$(P\land R)~\mathbf{F}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$R~\mathbf{F}$}
				]
			]
			[.{$(P\lor \sim R)~\mathbf{T}$}
				[.{$P~\mathbf{T}$}
				]
				[.{$\sim R ~\mathbf{T}$}
					$R~\mathbf{F}$
				]
			]
		]
	]
```
</div>

This is interesting, but there is one problem in using this method to
determine whether a sentence is true (we will eventually extend the same
technique to also test arguments for validity). How do we know what the truth
values of the basic components of a sentence are? 

The answer is that sometimes, we will not know. But in some of the cases where
we don't know, we can still figure out the truth value of the whole sentence.
The trick is this. When we do not know what the truth values of the basic
parts of a sentence are, we can still know what the *might be*. And that is
sometimes enough. Because, when we know all of the possible truth values of
the sentence letters---all the truth values the sentence letters might
have---we can check each possibility. If the sentence is true on every
possibility, then the sentence (and indeed, any similar sentence) must be
true, no matter which of the ways the truth values actually turn out to be
assigned. 

If a sentence is true no matter what the truth values of its sentence letters
turn out to be, we say that the sentence is a *tautology*.

Tautology

:   A sentence in official or unofficial notation is a tautology if it is true
no matter what truth values are assigned to its sentence letters.

To find out whether a sentence is a tautology, we just need to list all of the
ways that truth values might be assigned to its sentence letters, and then use
the method of Example 3 to determine what truth values the sentence have on
those assignments. This is not too hard to do, in principle, but it can be a
little bit hard to check whether you have listed \emph{all} of the possible
ways that truth values can be assigned to the sentence letters. So, here is a
simple method of bookkeeping, called "the method of truth tables", which is
helpful when trying to see whether a sentence is a tautology.

##Conditionals

We now are equipped with the method of composing truth values, and the rules
for $\land,\lor$ and $\sim$. These  tools make it possible for us to tell, of
any sentence in our language built out of $\land, \lor$ and $\sim$, what its
truth value is (so long as we know the truth values of its parts). And they
will soon give us the power to tell, of any argument formulated in our
language, whether it is formally valid.

But we are still missing some pieces. In particular, we do not know what the
rules for $\rightarrow$, and $\leftrightarrow$ are. These two connectives are
related; the first means "If, \ldots then", while the second means "if and
only if". Since the $\rightarrow$ makes sentences that say that something will
happen on some condition, it is sometimes called a \emph{conditional}. Since
$\leftrightarrow$ makes sentences saying that one thing will happen if another
does, and only if that other does (incorporating two conditions), it is
sometimes called a \emph{biconditional}.

When is a sentence which looks like $(\phi\leftrightarrow\psi)$, built using
$\leftrightarrow$ true? We say that such a sentence is true only when both
halves (the $\phi$ and the $\psi$) have the same truth value. This has some
intuitive appeal. $\leftrightarrow$ means "if and only if". If someone says "I
will come to the party if, and only if, there is some beer", then they've lied
(said something false) if there's beer and they don't come to the party. After
all, they said they'd come if there's some beer. They've also lied if they
come to the party even though there's no beer. After all, they said they'd
come *only* if there was beer. On the other hand, if there's no beer and they
don't come, or if there's beer and they do, they're behaving as they said they
would.

So, 

#.  If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is true, then $(P\leftrightarrow Q)$ must be true.
#.  If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is false, then $(P\leftrightarrow Q)$ must be false.
#.  If $P$ is false and $Q$ is true, then $(P\leftrightarrow Q)$ must be false.
#.  If both $P$ and $Q$ are false, then $(P\leftrightarrow Q)$ must be true.
#.  If $P$ is true and $Q$ is true, and $R$ is also true, then
    $(P\leftrightarrow Q)$ must be true, so $((P\leftrightarrow Q)\leftrightarrow
    R)$ must also be true.

What about a sentence which looks like $(\phi\rightarrow\psi)$? Here, some
cases are clear.  $(\phi\rightarrow\psi)$ means "if $\phi$ then $\psi$".  If
someone says "if there's beer, I will come to the party", then they've lied
(said something false) if there's beer and they don't come to the party (after
all, they said they'd come if there's some beer), and they've been honest if
there's beer at the party, so they come to the party. Some cases are not
terribly clear. Were they saying something true if it turns out that there's
no beer at the party? We have no cause for complaint, at least---we can't
accuse them of lying. So it is plausible to simply stipulate that we will
understand $(\phi\rightarrow\psi)$ to be true whenever $\phi$ is false. 

There are a number of reasons for this stipulation. One reason is that it is
the simplest solution---all other ways of treating conditionals are much more
complicated. Moreover, those other accounts of conditionals inevitably build
on the type of simple logic we are doing here. So we need to start with this
simplification if we are to understand these more complicated accounts. A
third reason is that this set of rules for the conditional are the only
possible way of introducing $\rightarrow$ into our language without either
violating the principle of truth functionality, or making $\rightarrow$ mean
the same thing as some other connective that we already have. The last reason
for accepting this stipulation is that, by and large, it works. In fact, we
are committed to it in various ways by our deductive system[^5]

[^5]: Consider, for example, the MC rules, which we can derive: $P\therefore
Q\rightarrow P$ and $\sim Q\rightarrow Q\rightarrow P$. These show that the
conditional is true whenever its antecedent is false or consequent is true.
And the NC rule, $P\land \sim Q\therefore \sim(P\rightarrow Q)$ tells us that
the conditional is false whenever the antecedent is true and the conclusion
false.

#. If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is true, then $(P\rightarrow Q)$ must be true.
#. If $P$ is true, and $Q$ is false, then $(P\rightarrow Q)$ must be false.
#. If $P$ is false and $Q$ is true, then $(P\rightarrow Q)$ must be true.
#. If both $P$ and $Q$ are false, then $(P\leftrightarrow Q)$ must be true.
#. If $P$ is true and $Q$ is true, and $R$ is also true, then
$(P\leftrightarrow Q)$ must be true, so $((P\leftrightarrow Q)\leftrightarrow
R)$ must also be true.

We can summarize the rules for $\leftrightarrow$ and $\rightarrow$ as follows: 

Truth-Value Rules for $\rightarrow$, $\leftrightarrow$

:   #.  if a sentence has $\rightarrow$ as its main connective, it is true
    when the left half is false, or the right half is true. Otherwise it is false.
    #.  If a sentence has $\leftrightarrow$ as its main connective, it is true
    when the left half and the right half have the same truth value.
    Otherwise, it is false.

We now have the rules for all of the connectives. Using these rules, together
with the method of truth tables, and the method composing truth-values, it is
possible to determine of any sentence in our language, whether that sentence
is a tautology.

##The Method of Truth Tables

<div class="algorithm">
The (Sped-Up) Method of Truth-Tables

:   #.  Make a "table" by drawing two lines that cross one another---one
    separating the top row of the table from the rest, one separating the left
    half of the table from the right.
    #.  Find all of the sentence letters of the sentence you are testing. List
    those letters on the top row, in the left half of the table, and write the
    sentence that you are testing in the right half of the table.
    #.  Determine the number of sentence letters, and compute $2^n$, where $n$
    is the number of sentence letters (that is, multiply $2$ by itself once
    for each sentence letter after the first---if there is one sentence
    letter, you will get 2 as a result. If there are 2, you will get 4, if
    there are 3, you will get 8, and so on.) write in that many rows in the
    lower half of the table.
    #.  Underneath the first sentence letter, fill the first half of the rows
    with the letter $T$, and the second half with the letter $F$. Under the
    second sentence letter, fill the first half of the first half of the rows
    with the letter $T$, the second half of the first half with the letter
    $F$, the first half of the second half with the letter $T$, and the second
    half of the second half with the letter $F$. Continue this pattern.
    #.  Underneath each sentence letter on the right, fill in its truth
    values, as listed on the left.
    #.  Underneath each connective which is connecting a formula or formulas
    that are either 
        #.  Sentence letters,
        #.  Complex sentences with truth values filled in under their main
        connectives, use the Truth-Value rules to fill in truth values, on the
        basis of what is under the complex formulas or sentence letters that
        that connective  are connecting. Repeat this step until every
        connective has truth values filled in underneath.
    #.  If you end up with only $T$s underneath the main connective of the
    sentence you are testing, then you have found a tautology. If you end up
    with one or more $F$ underneath the sentence, then you have found a
    non-tautology.
</div>

####Ex. 4
Here's an example of how to use the method of truth tables. Suppose we want to
know whether $(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$ is a tautology. 

Step 1: we make a table:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img8 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
&&\quad\phantom{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline &\quad&\\
&&\\
&&\\
&&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

Step 2: We find the sentence letters in our sentence (they are $P$ and $Q$)
and we list them on the top left. We write the sentence we are testing on the
right:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img9 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline &\quad&\\
&&\\
&&\\
&&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

We have two sentence letters, so step 3 tells us to write in $2^2 = 4$ rows:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img10 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline &\quad&\\
\hdashline&&\\
\hdashline&&\\
\hdashline&&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

For step 4, underneath the first sentence letter (i.e. $P$), we fill the first
half of the rows (i.e. the first two rows) with the letter $T$, and the second
two rows with $F$. We then fill in the first half of the first half (i.e. the
first row) under the second letter with $T$, the second half of the first half
with with $F$, the first half of the second half with $T$, and so on:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img11 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline T&T&\\
\hdashline T&F&\\
\hdashline F&T&\\
\hdashline F&F&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

So far, this has been much the same as the simple method of truth tables. But now, we need to start filling in truth values "within the table", rather than using the method of composing truth values. The first step is to fill in the truth values under all the sentence letters:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img12 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline T&T&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{23pt}T\\
\hdashline T&F&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{23pt}T\\
\hdashline F&T&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{23pt}F\\
\hdashline F&F&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{23pt}F\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

Having done this, we now have exactly one connective which is flanked by
sentence letters or formulas that we have filled in the main connective for.
This one connective is the leftmost $\rightarrow$. So, we can fill in truth
values for that.

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img13 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline T&T&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{23pt}T\\
\hdashline T&F&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{23pt}T\\
\hdashline F&T&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{23pt}F\\
\hdashline F&F&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{23pt}F\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

Now, though, we have filled in truth values for both $P$ and for
$(P\rightarrow Q)$, the two things that the second-from-rightmost
$\rightarrow$ is connecting. So, we can fill in truth values for that, on the
basis of what we have filled in for these (remember, we put what we fill in
for $(P\rightarrow Q)$ under the main connective of this formula):

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img14 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline T&T&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{23pt}T\\
\hdashline T&F&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{23pt}T\\
\hdashline F&T&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{23pt}F\\
\hdashline F&F&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{23pt}F\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

There's just one connective remaining, the rightmost $\rightarrow$. This one, we can fill in by looking at what we have put under the main connective of $((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)$ and of $P$:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img15 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$}\\
\hline T&T&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\\
\hdashline T&F&\hspace{20pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}T\\
\hdashline F&T&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}F\\
\hdashline F&F&\hspace{20pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{7pt}F\hspace{7pt}T\hspace{7pt}F\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

We now know what the truth values underneath the main connective of
$(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow P)$ are: they are all T. That
means, according to step 7, that $(((P\rightarrow Q)\rightarrow P)\rightarrow
P)$ is a tautology.

The last addition we wish to make to the method of truth tables is to show how
truth tables can be used to test, not just whether a sentence is a tautology,
but whether an argument (which consists of several sentences: a conclusion,
and also some premises) is formally valid.

Recall that an argument is formally valid when all arguments of the same
logical form are deductively valid: when those arguments cannot have true
premises and a false conclusion. When we think about formal validity, we are
confronted with the following problem: how can we know that *all* the
arguments with a certain form are deductively valid? There are infinitely
many, and we can't check them all. 

The solution we proposed was to combine the principle of truth functionality,
and the compositionally of our language, to show that the truth value of a
sentence in our language depends only on the truth values of it's basic parts.
This let us check to see whether a sentence of a certain form was a tautology:
whether any sentence having that form could possibly be false. We now will
extend this technique to check to see whether there is any possible way that
an argument with a certain logical form could possibly have true premises and
a false conclusion. 

Because of compositionally and truth functionality, ALL of the possible ways
that a sentence of our language having a given form can get truth values are
summarized by the possibilities of assigning truth values to its components.
So, if there is no way to assign truth values to the components of the
sentences in an argument which makes the premises true and the conclusion
false, then there is no way  for the premises of an argument of that form to
be true and the conclusion false. So, the argument must be deductively valid.

Thus, we must modify our method of truth tables to determine whether there is
any way of assigning truth values to the sentences of an argument which will
make the conclusion false, while also making the premises true. Here is the
modified method:

<div class="algorithm">

The Full Method of Truth-Tables

:   #.  Make a "table" by drawing two lines that cross one another---one
    separating the top row of the table from the rest, one separating the left
    half of the table from the right.
    #.  Find all of the sentence letters of the argument you are testing. List
    those letters on the top row, in the left half of the table. Write the
    premises that you are testing in the right half of the table, separating
    each one from the next by using a period, thus: ".". When you have listed
    all the premises, write a therefore symbol, thus: "$\therefore$", and
    write the conclusion to the right of that.
    #.  Determine the number of sentence letters, and compute $2^n$, where $n$
    is the number of sentence letters (that is, multiply $2$ by itself once
    for each sentence letter after the first---if there is one sentence
    letter, you will get 2 as a result. If there are 2, you will get 4, if
    there are 3, you will get 8, and so on.) write in that many rows in the
    lower half of the table.
    #.  Underneath the first sentence letter, fill the first half of the rows
    with the letter $T$, and the second half with the letter $F$. Under the
    second sentence letter, fill the first half of the first half of the rows
    with the letter $T$, the second half of the first half with the letter
    $F$, the first half of the second half with the letter $T$, and the second
    half of the second half with the letter $F$. Continue this pattern.
    #.  Underneath each sentence letter on the right, fill in its truth
    values, as listed on the left.
    #.  Underneath each connective which is connecting a formula or formulas
    that are either 
        #.  Sentence letters,
        #.  Complex sentences with truth values filled in under their main
        connectives, use the Truth-Value rules to fill in truth values, on the
        basis of what is under the complex formulas or sentence letters that
        that connective  are connecting. Repeat this step until every
        connective has truth values filled in underneath.
    #.  If, in every row where \emph{all} the premises have T written
    underneath their main connectives, the conclusion also has T written its
    main connective, then it is impossible to assign truth values so as to
    make the premises true and the conclusion false. Hence, your argument is
    formally valid. If there is a row in which all the premises have T written
    underneath, and the conclusion has F, then your argument is not formally
    valid.

</div>


####Ex. 5
Here's an example of how to use the sped-up method of truth tables. Suppose we
want to know whether the argument $P\rightarrow Q$, therefore $\sim
Q\rightarrow \sim P$ is valid. 

Step 1: We make a table:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img16 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
&&\quad\phantom{$P\rightarrow Q\therefore \sim Q\rightarrow \sim P$}\\
\hline &\quad&\\
&&\\
&&\\
&&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

Step 2: We find the sentence letters in our sentences (they are $P$ and $Q$)
and we list them on the top left. We write the sentences we are testing on the
right:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img17 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad$P\rightarrow Q\therefore \sim Q\rightarrow \sim P$\\
\hline &\quad&\\
&&\\
&&\\
&&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

We have two sentence letters, so step 3 tells us to write in $2^2 = 4$ rows:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img18 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad$P\rightarrow Q\therefore \sim Q\rightarrow \sim P$\\
\hline &\quad&\\
\hdashline&&\\
\hdashline&&\\
\hdashline&&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

For step 4, underneath the first sentence letter (i.e. $P$), we fill the first
half of the rows (i.e. the first two rows) with the letter $T$, and the second
two rows with $F$. We then fill in the first half of the first half (i.e. the
first row) under the second letter with $T$, the second half of the first half
with with $F$, the first half of the second half with $T$, and so on:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img19 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad$P\rightarrow Q\therefore \sim Q\rightarrow \sim P$\\
\hline T&T&\\
\hdashline T&F&\\
\hdashline F&T&\\
\hdashline F&F&\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

As before, we need to start filling in truth values "within the table", rather
than using the method of composing truth values. Step 5 tells us to fill in
the truth values under all the sentence letters:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img20 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$P\rightarrow Q\therefore \sim Q\rightarrow \sim P$}\\
\hline T&T&\hspace{12pt}T\hspace{15pt}T\hspace{25pt}T\hspace{25pt}T\\
\hdashline T&F&\hspace{12pt}T\hspace{15pt}F\hspace{25pt}F\hspace{25pt}T\\
\hdashline F&T&\hspace{12pt}F\hspace{15pt}T\hspace{25pt}T\hspace{25pt}F\\
\hdashline F&F&\hspace{12pt}F\hspace{15pt}F\hspace{25pt}F\hspace{25pt}F\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

We now have several connectives which are attached to formulas that have their
truth values filled in. So, we can fill in truth values for each of those (the
order in which we do so does not matter).

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img21 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$P\rightarrow Q\therefore \sim Q\rightarrow \sim P$}\\
\hline T&T&\hspace{12pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{13pt}F~T\hspace{13pt}F~T\\
\hdashline T&F&\hspace{12pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{13pt}T~F\hspace{13pt}F~T\\
\hdashline F&T&\hspace{12pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{13pt}F~T\hspace{13pt}T~F\\
\hdashline F&F&\hspace{12pt}F\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{13pt}T~F\hspace{13pt}T~F\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

There's just one connective remaining, the rightmost $\rightarrow$. This one,
we can fill in by looking at what we have put under the main connective of
$\sim P$ and of $\sim Q$:

<div style="display: table; margin: 0 auto">

```{#img22 .latex .tikz}
\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{cc|c}
P&Q&\quad{$P\rightarrow Q\therefore \sim Q\rightarrow \sim P$}\\
\hline T&T&\hspace{12pt}T\hspace{5pt}*T*\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{13pt}F~T\hspace{5pt}*T*\hspace{5pt}F~T\\
\hdashline T&F&\hspace{12pt}T\hspace{5pt}*F*\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{13pt}T~F\hspace{5pt}*F*\hspace{5pt}F~T\\
\hdashline F&T&\hspace{12pt}F\hspace{5pt}*T*\hspace{5pt}T\hspace{13pt}F~T\hspace{5pt}*T*\hspace{5pt}T~F\\
\hdashline F&F&\hspace{12pt}F\hspace{5pt}*T*\hspace{5pt}F\hspace{13pt}T~F\hspace{5pt}*T*\hspace{5pt}T~F\\
\end{tabular}
\end{center}
```

</div>

We now know what the truth values underneath the conclusion are: TFTT.
Underneath the one and only premise, the truth values are also TFTT. Hence,
every row in which every premise is true (namely, the first, third, and fourth
rows) is also a row in which the conclusion is true. So, according to step 6,
the argument is formally valid.
